This is a list of features which should eventually become part of GAP.

Table Of Contents
-----------------

1) Was weak pointer objects			IMPLEMENTED
2) Finalise methods
3) Subgroup inclusions/Lattice
4) Saving of objects, Marshalling
5) Variadic Methods				SHOULD GO IN 4.2
6) Printing, Viewing, Strings and Streams	SHOULD GO IN 4.2
7) Lists that do not know their length          SHOULD GO IN 4.2

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2) Finalise methods
-------------------

2.1) Definition
---------------

When an object <obj> is collected as garbage it should be possible to
call a method 'Finalise' which will clean up anything associated with
this object outside the control of GASMAN, for example, files,
directories, streams belonging to this object.

2.2) Problems
-------------

There are various problems with finalise methods:

- because the finalise occurs inside the garbage collections calling 
  any methods must be postponed until the heap is in a clean state again
  and objects with a finalise method (and their subobjects!) must not 
  thrown away (see below) until this method has been called.

- 'NewBag' must be reentrant

- The finalise methods might again cause a garbage collection, special
  care has to be taken so that this does not cause any problems

- Thinking of the example above the objects involving finalise methods
  might be ordered in a tree structure , these trees must be cleared
  top-down (example: files point to directories, therefore the files
  must be finalised before finalising the directories).  If there is
  a cycle you lose!

- Functions can be called without a (obvious) reason, for example, 
  "(1,2)^2" triggers a garbage collection which will cause various objects
  to finalise.  This is a philosophical problem not a technical one.


2.3) Possible Implementation
----------------------------

This implementation assumes that objects with finalise methods are not
inside a deep tree structure (where all the nodes must be finalised).  It
will not collect all garbage immediately but instead postpone some so
that it can finalise trees top-down.

A list of objects which can be finalised is stored as linked list in
'ToBeFinalised'.

Lets assume the a garbage collections starts which is not inside a
garbage collection.  In this case 'ToBeFinalised' is zero.

a) Set 'ToBeFinalised' to something non-zero.

b) run through the heap and mark all objects alive which can be reached
   from global pointers

c) run through the heap and look for soon-to-be-dead objects with a 
   finalise method, mark all *subobjects* as alive

d) run through the heap and look for soon-to-be-dead objects with a 
   finalise method, put them on the linked list 'ToBeFinalised' and
   mark them as alive

e) collect the garbage, if there is no room gained by this step we might
   be in *deep* trouble, try to get more space from the OS.

f) restore the heap to a sane state, note that it *might* be possible
   to use the link fields to implement the linked list 'ToBeFinalised'.

g) now loop over the linked list 'ToBeFinalised', take the first
   element on this list and *do not* remove it right now (see below
   in case of a nested garbage collection).  Call the finalise method
   for this object - this might cause a nested garbage collection!

h) after the finalise method is finished remove the object from the
   'ToBeFinalised' list, and free its memory

i) repeat g)

Lets assume that a nested garbage collection is going on.  In this
case 'ToBeFinalised' is *not* zero.

a) run through the heap and mark all objects alive which can be reached
   from global pointers *including* the list 'ToBeFinalised'

b) run through the heap and look for soon-to-be-dead objects with a 
   finalise method, mark all *subobjects* as alive

c) run through the heap and look for objects with a finalise method,
   add them on the linked list 'ToBeFinalised' and mark them as alive

d) collect the garbage, if there is no room gain by this step we might
   be in *deep* trouble

e) restore the heap to a sane state, note that it *might* be possible
   to use the link fields to implement the linked list 'ToBeFinalised'.

h) *do not* loop over the linked list 'ToBeFinalised' in order
   to avoid finalising an object twice.

i) return to the called NewBag, then the finalising method which called 
   the NewBag, and eventually to the top garbage collection.  This will 
   deal with the new objects on 'ToBeFinalised'.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3) Subgroup inclusions/Lattice

There should be documented functions to compute maximal subgroups/minimal
supergroups within a lattice. They should provide conjugating elements (when
only class representatives are stored.)
Both is essentially (missing the user interface) there for the cyclic
extension code but still missing if elementary abelian extension is used.
Probably one should use more clever methods like the SpecialAg code.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4) Saving of objects, Marshalling

This is not a
yet a full proposal, but only a description of a scheme that I think offers
a reasonable facility to save several objects together with relations among
them for later reading by GAP. It will yield a GAP file that when reading in
creates ``equivalent'' objects to the ones saved (I'm not using ``equal''
because reading in again a saved file will for example for finitely presented
groups create *new* objects that are not *equal* to the old ones. It also
will not save all known attributes and properties. If this is desired the
``save workspace'' facility must be used).

When saving an object enough context must be saved to create the object.
That is for a finitely presented group the corresponding free group and the
relators have to be saved as well. When storing a subgroup the parent has to
be printed before.
We have to be careful, however, when saving say several subgroups of an fp
group. In this situation the parent must be printed only once and all parent
references must be to this object. Also it may be necessary or desirable to
assign the parent generators to temporary variables to permit reasonable
printing of words that generate the subgroups. 

To keep track of relations among the objects and about whether objects have
been saved already, saving is a multiple stage process:

ctx:=StartSave(<filename>);

initiates saving of objects on the indicated file it returns a ``save
context'' (an object used for tracking information about things already
saved). If we agree that at most one save context may be open at any time,
this may as well be a hidden global variable.

The operation

Save(<ctx>,<obj>,<varname>)

saves the object <obj> in the context <ctx>, using variable name <varname>
(we cannot obtain a variable name from an object).

EndSave(<ctx>) closes a save context. (Depending on the objects involved, it
may be necessary to delay the actual writing to the file to this point.
Before ending a save context it can not be guaranteed that the file is
usable.)


Some more detail:

The save context stores all objects saved with the (temporary) variable name
under which they were saved. Therefore `Save' first checks if the object
is already saved in the given context and if yes just adds a corresponding
variable assignment.
Otherwise `Save' will call an operation `SaveObj' (same syntax) for which
suitable methods for all object must be installed.
`SaveObj' will first `Save' (i.e. save only if not yet done)
all objects needed for the creation under
temporary variables (the save context will keep track of the temporary
variables used) and then print a command that will create the object under
the indicated variable name, using the objects it depends on saved before.
(It seems a function `VariableSavedObject(<ctx>,<obj>)' that saves the
object <obj> if not yet done and returns the variable name under which it
was saved should be used here.)

  For example if U is a subgroup of an fp group,

  Save(<ctx>,U,"U")

  first calls

  parnam:=VariableSavedObject(<ctx>,Parent(U)) (which recursively saves free
  group, presentation &c.) and
  gen:=VariableSavedObject(GeneratorsOfGroup(Parent(U)));

  and then prints via

  AppendTo(ctx.file,varnam":=Subgroup(",parnam,","["    ...&c.

The save routine may want to store some ``small'' known attributes (for
example a permutation groups size) but for debugging purposes it must be
possible to switch this feature off.

There are several problems and caveats:

- The temporary variables. Even if we name them to avoid collisions
  (e.g. "__tV123") the temporary variables that are not explicitly assigned
  to ``used'' variables remain bound. One could add ``Unbind''
  commands at the end of the file. Or one starts a save file with a 'local'
  command.
- Cyclic references must be broken temporarily when saving objects and then
  be added later. (This essentially only affects records and lists.)
  For example:

  A:=[];
  B:=[A];
  # added later:
  A[1]:=B;

  The easiest way to cope with this seems to be to store in the context
  which objects are currently being saved and to stop recursions when again
  saving these objects, instead noting in the context the assignment necessary
  at the end to close the loop again
  and printing it only after the object itself had been printed.
- Mutable objects may change during the save process. This must be users
  responsibility to avoid. (Again this affects only records and lists.)
- Attributes: An object saved may have been stored as attribute of another
  saved object. To take care of this, we must check at the end whether any
  saved object occurs as attribute of another saved object and if yes the
  appropriate setter command must be added. (This can be done during
  `EndSave'.) A nice side effect is that it will permit to save selected
  attributes deliberately.
  If an object does only occur in another attribute (for example a Sylow
  subgroup) things get messy. I don't think we should try to deal with such
  cases (otherwise the search process will take very long and we might end
  up storing some large attributes that are not really needed). This feature
  is beyond the simple `save' mechanism and is covered by `SaveWorkspace'.
- Weak pointers must be ignored.

The save context also seems to be a suitable data structure for marshalling
(that is transfering objects in small form to another program with
preserving all relations.) A typical example would be the communication in
GAPMPI.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

5) Variadic Methods 

THE IDEA is to be able to install a method that is applicable if the
operation is called with k OR MORE arguments, such that the first k 
meet the given specification. The method must obviously be a
function(arg). 

SOME SUBTLETIES arise:

1.  How does a variadic method with three specified arguments rank
    versus a method (fixed or variadic) with four specifiesd 
    arguments, or versus a fixed method with three arguments?

    Conclusion is that all methods with more specified arguments rank
    ahead of all methods with fewer. All methods with the same number
    of specified arguments are ranked according to the current rules

2.  How do the family predicates work? Can/must they be variadic too? 
    
    Conclusion: variadic family predicates will not be allowed,
    because it makes it too hard to work out which arguments will
    have their types computed (see Stage 2 below).
   

3.  Is any function( arg ) installed as a method treated in this way?

    Conclusion: no. Some special installation function
    InstallVariadicMethod must be used. There are two many existing 
    installations fo variadic functions (eg Operations) in the library 
    and they are not intended to be used in this way

PROPOSED IMPLEMENTATION

Stage 1: making it work

    Store in every operation a list of all variadic methods and their
    requirements in decreasing lex order of ( <k>, <rank> ).

    Install variadic methods in this list AND in the list of <k>
    argument methods.

    Make Method<n>Args check this list after it runs out of <n>
    argument methods, starting with k = n-1.

    Add DoOperationXArgs and MethodXArgs (taking a list of types)
     to handle 7+ arguments. Computing the types of 6 will always
     be enough -- no method cache in this case.

    Update ApplicableMethod, HandleMethodNotFound etc. to reflect this

Stage 2: making it better

    Store in every operation a 7-place bit-list indicating
    whether it has installed methods with 0,1,..6 arguments.

    Store in every operation the maximum <k> of any variadic
    method.

    Adjust DoOperation<n>Args to use this information to
    only compute types which might be needed. For the method cache,
    replace the others with some dummy value.

    Consider how to organise a method cache for DoOperationXArgs

---------------------------------------------------------------------

6) (summarising a proposal of various people)

The present operations PrintObj, ViewObj, Display, etc. will be
supplemented by String, ViewString, DisplayString, etc. and
PrintObjTo, ViewObjTo, DisplayObjTo, etc.

String &c will have most of the methods. They will return strings
containing format control characters like \> \< and \n introduced by
the methods. A function/operation CleanedString will be available to
strip them.

PrintObjTo will have a method which calls String and then some kernel
function to deliver the String to the stream. Existing kernel PrintObj 
machinery will probably stay (but be available also as kernel String
machinery) but be generalized to support PrintObjTo.

PrintObj will simply by PrintObjTo( __ , stdout )

Same story for ViewObj and Display (which should proabbly become
DisplayObj).


The String stuff is general good practice and just useful.

The ...To stuff is to avoid the current huge inefficiency in PrintTo,
of opening the stream and then closing it. The single output file
model is too constraining. By keeping the stream as a parameter all
the way through the library and kernel printing process, we can keep
its data structures alive in the kernel all the time and save a lot of 
work (this will also mean streams having to explicitly create their
"kernel part" when they are created, and destroy it when they are
closed. The kernel part might include a pointer to the WriteAll
method, which is a bit ugly, but will save a lot of time.

-------------------------------------------------------------------

7. The idea here is to give almost all lists, from creation the filter 
CanEasilyComputeLength or some such, and use it to select methods in
various places. Lists not in this filter are things like enumerators
of fp groups, which don't yet know their order.



  






    
    
 